[WIP] extend vetKeys docs (#5669)
dfinity/portal: docs/building-apps/network-features/vetkeys/verifiable-randomness.mdx

---
keywords: [advanced, concept, random, randomness, onchain randomness, raw_rand]
---

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import useBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import { AdornedTabs } from "/src/components/Tabs/AdornedTabs";
import { AdornedTab } from "/src/components/Tabs/AdornedTab";
import { BetaChip } from "/src/components/Chip/BetaChip";

# Externally verifiable randomness

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Advanced", "Concept"]} />

vetKeys can generate **externally verifiable randomness**, ensuring that the randomness was produced as intended. This is particularly useful in scenarios like lotteries or random NFT trait generation, where external users must be able to verify the randomness used in the process.

It can be cryptographically proven that the vetKey was derived using the correct inputs. Verifiable randomness can be generated by:

> - First, a vetKey is derived for a specific request ID.
> 
> - The canister decrypts the vetKey.
> 
> - The hash of the vetKey is used as the source of randomness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  vetKey is derived for a specific request ID.

2. The canister decrypts the vetKey.

3. The hash of the vetKey is used as the source of randomness.
```
